---
layout: post
title: Mounting folders as drives (without SUBST)
description: How you can be more productive with virtual drives
comments: true
---

When I got my first job as a developer in '97 my coworker introduced me to using
a drive as the root for all the source code. This is awesome because it means
it's super fast to get to, no matter where you are: some Windows file dialog,
Windows Explorer, or the terminal. Your source code is always only three letters
away. Of course, this technique isn't limited to source code. It can apply to
anything you're working on: documents, photos, or videos.

For the longest time I've used `SUBST` to achieve this, but in this post I'm
going to show a much better alternative.

## What's wrong with SUBST?

Using `SUBST` is pretty easy. You only need a batch file like this:

```batch
@echo off
subst P: D:\Projects
subst T: D:\Trash
```

In this case, I'm mounting `D:\Project` as my `P:` drive and `D:\Trash` as my
`T:` drive.

The issue with `SUBST` is that it's only visible to the current user. For most
cases that seems appropriate but even if you only use a single user, those
drives aren't visible inside an elevated context, which can be extremely
annoying. Also, there is a minor issue that the batch file needs to be
registered as a startup script which sometimes means you have to wait after a
reboot before you can access the drives. Not a biggie, but still.

## The solution

I recently did some digging and found this nifty solution on [Super User].
Basically, it registers a virtual drive for the entire machine. You can even run
services off of it!

The only caveat is that you need to prefix the path with `\??\`. In case you use
a `.reg` file (which you should so you can recreate this when you need to set up
your machine again), you also need to escape the backslashes by doubling them.

For my case this looks as follows:

```text
Windows Registry Editor Version 5.00

[HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\CurrentControlSet\Control\Session Manager\DOS Devices]
"P:"="\\??\\D:\\Projects"
"T:"="\\??\\D:\\Trash"
```

Just put the content in a file with the extension of `.reg` and run it. Done!

## How I use it

Some people use `C:\src` as the root for their source code. Sure, that works
too. But I generally don't want to store anything on my `C:` drive that I care
about. For me, `C:` is only for the OS and apps. Everything else goes on `D:`,
which is usually a physical drive or at least a partition. This makes it very
easy to reset the machine too. No need to worry about accidentally nuking any
documents or projects you care about.

Of course, `D:\src` would equally work, but I like to organize my `D:` drive a
bit more, but I don't want to sacrifice how easy it is to get to.

Also, using virtual drives allows you to standardize the drives between
machines. For example, I sometimes don't have a secondary drive or I have
multiple drives so on different machines my source code might actually lie on
different drives. With a virtual drive letter that is in the middle of the
alphabet you can likely ensure that you can use the same letter across all
machines.

For the most part I use `P:` and `T:` drives:

* **`P:`** represents the home of projects, so each top level folder is some git
  repository.

* **`T:`** represents all the temporary stuff I'm doing. You know, where
  `ConsoleApplication32` lives.

At some point I also had `M:` where I stored media files (e.g. icons) and `V:`
where I put my videos for editing.

[Super User]: https://superuser.com/a/29076

## Summary

Virtual drives are awesome. `SUBST` can be awkward but when you register them in
the Windows Registry, they just work great.